---
layout: post
title: Rails Camp in the Adelaide Hills
date: 2008-11-23
permalink: /blog/archives/2008-11-23-rails-camp-in-the-adelaide-hills
---

I think I’ve just about recovered from last weekend’s [Rails
Camp](http://railscamps.com/) in the Adelaide Hills. Whether I was
hacking or socialising, as the hour got later each evening it just
seemed easier to ignore the fact that I was going to pay later for the
lack of sleep.

It was worth it though. This was the best attended Rails Camp yet with
about 70 Rails developers converging from different parts of Australia.
One of the aspects I like about these events is their self-organising
nature. The [unconference](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unconference)
style encourages learning within small groups for much of the event. In
my case I was determined to practice using
[Cucumber](http://github.com/aslakhellesoy/cucumber/tree/master),
[Webrat](http://github.com/brynary/webrat/tree/master) and
[Machinist](http://github.com/notahat/machinist/tree/master) and
benefited from the fact that several others were also cutting their
teeth on Cucumber.

There are also plenty of opportunities to share with the whole group. At
this camp I was fortunate that [Pete Yandell](http://notahat.com/), the
author of Machinist, was one of those who spoke. I also thoroughly
enjoyed the lengthy discussion which was precipitated by [Pat
Allan’s](http://freelancing-gods.com/) talk about Freelancing.

Quite apart from the learning opportunities, I appreciated catching up
with other Rails developers I hadn’t seen for a while and making new
friendships. I’m looking forward to my next Rails Camp already.
Hopefully the number of attendees doesn’t increase. I think it has
reached its limit for a good unconference.
