---
layout: post
title: Rails Camp 5 and Sydney RORO Meetup
date: 2009-06-11
permalink: /blog/archives/2009-06-11-rails-camp-5-and-sydney-roro-meetup
---

I think it’s time I gave a brief update about a couple of professional
events within the Australian Ruby community that I’ve recently enjoyed.

## Rails Camp 5

Last month over an extended weekend the fifth Australian Rails Camp was
held in the Queensland Gold Coast Hinterland. The venue was superb, much
fun was had and a great deal of thanks is due to the Brisbane contingent
who organised the event.

Having started the weekend working on my own to improve my iPhone
development skills, particularly with respect to using
[ObjectiveResource](http://iphoneonrails.com/) to integrate an iPhone
app with a Rails backend, I was actually very pleased that I didn’t
continue on this path beyond Saturday afternoon. From Saturday evening
onwards I teamed up with Martin Stannard and Michael Koukoullis to
develop a Heroku-like tool called Bivouac. I thoroughly enjoyed our
collaboration and learnt much from it. For anyone else considering
attending a future [Rails Camp](http://railscamps.org/) I thoroughly
recommend getting involved in a team project rather than working alone.

More on [Bivouac](http://bivou.ac) in a later post. Meanwhile, you can
find [the source](http://github.com/martinstannard/bivouac/tree/master)
on github.

## Sydney June RORO Meeting

Earlier this week the monthly Sydney RORO (Ruby on Rails Oceania)
meeting featured a [dozen lightning
talks](http://rubyonrails.com.au/2009/6/5/sydney-meetup-june-2009). In
one of my talks I shared a technique for providing XML in a legacy
format via REST, XML Builder and a presenter object. Whilst the example
is contrived, the technique is one that I used to handle a requirement
for a client recently.

Here are the [slides](https://www.slideshare.net/keithpitty/using-rest-and-xml-builder-for-legacy-xml).

In fairness, I must give credit to Obie Fernandez for his coverage of
XML Builder in his book, *The Rails Way*, which gave me a head start.
