---
layout: post
title: Stress and Software Development
date: 2014-10-10
permalink: /blog/archives/2014-10-10-stress-and-software-development
---

It is with a sense of poignancy that I begin this post.

It is [World Mental Health
Day](http://www.who.int/mental_health/world-mental-health-day/en/) and I
am [fulfilling a pledge](https://1010.org.au/content/promise-5905).

![](https://keithpitty.com/rails/active_storage/blobs/proxy/eyJfcmFpbHMiOnsibWVzc2FnZSI6IkJBaHBNZz09IiwiZXhwIjpudWxsLCJwdXIiOiJibG9iX2lkIn19--29f12e963cc9042a6740f38fd4f4745697940ea2/wmhd-2014-pledge.jpg)

Why do I find it poignant?

It is almost a year since a work colleague at Blake eLearning succumbed
to depression. Rob was one of a kind. Loud, extroverted, a man who loved
living life to the full. A born enthusiast and entertainer. I cannot
imagine another member of a development team who managed to participate
in a daily stand-up whilst riding his bicycle to work! But that was Rob.
He was much loved by the team, but vulnerable.

Personally, I only really knew Rob through our work. Life gets busy. In
retrospect, maybe I should have seen the warning signs and acted. But
it’s easy to say that in hindsight. There is only so much each
individual can do.

Rob’s passing struck a raw chord with me. After all, I had battled the
scourge of mental illness since I was 17. I had known the depths of
depression from which there seems no escape. Fortunately for me, I
managed to emerge and am still here to tell the tale.

## My Story

Maths was my pet subject at school. There were times when I topped the
year with full marks. And that was in a selective high school, so I
think I had some justification for feeling a modicum of pride.

However, in 1978, my life took an abrupt turn for the worse.

With the passing of time, there are things about this troubled period of
my life about which I have a hazy memory. Doubtless, there are some
aspects I have suppressed. But I have a very clear memory of an event
which must have provoked my self-awareness. I distinctly recall sitting
in a trial HSC Maths exam without the faintest idea of how to answer a
single question. Me, hopelessly scoring zero in a Maths test. Clearly
something was badly out of balance!

In retrospect, this was probably one of my earliest experiences of being
aware that something was very wrong with the way my brain was behaving.
I came to realise that during the previous few months I had been on a
bizarre high. I was about to plunge into prolonged depression.

The year that was meant to be my final year at high school was an
academic write-off.

Fortunately, I was able to muster enough resilience to fight through the
mental trough and eventually finish high school the next year. Then I
completed a Science degree which paved the way for my career as a
software developer.

However, throughout the years since, I have had a number of relapses.
Some have been more severe than others, obviously with serious potential
undesirable consequences. Luckily I have had wonderful personal and
professional support to help me back to normal life.

Depression obviously sucks, especially when it’s affecting you. There is
an up-side though. Maybe sometimes it is an effort to think about
experiences with depression in a “glass half-full” fashion, but it can
help.

Reflecting on my experiences of Bipolar Disorder, I think I have
gradually learned more about the nature of how mental illness affects me
and how I can learn to be more aware of stressors that can potentially
trigger episodes that I would prefer not to experience!

## The Nature of Software Development and Stress

The relationship between software development and stress is something
that, in the light of my own experience, I have been pondering. I know
that many stressors can play a part in triggering an unwelcome episode
of mental illness. The life of software development can contribute.

Of course, everyone has a different experience.

In my case, I have always had a penchant for patterns and for solving
problems. And, by solving problems, I mean the sort that have a
definitive answer. In high school and at university, essay writing was
never my strong point. I much preferred the challenge of finding the
answer to a Maths puzzle or solving a problem with a computer program.

### The Problem Solving Bias

More recently I have become aware that my bias towards solving problems
may have an unhealthy aspect. Naturally, not all life’s challenges are
best approached with a view to solving them as problems. Especially
within a given period of time! But that is the nature of what much of my
work has been for the last three decades. *Solving problems within
expected time-frames!* Even in these more enlightened days of [*Agile
software development*](http://agilemanifesto.org/), I find that I too
often set myself unrealistic expectations to finish particular tasks
before self-imposed deadlines. Old habits obviously die hard.

And that is just for software development tasks in my work.

I have realised that I am prone to subconsciously treat *people
problems* as ones to be resolved within a certain timeframe. Maybe it
also has to do with what I now see as the trap of the [*Getting Things
Done*](http://gettingthingsdone.com/) approach.

Sure it helps us in life to get things done if they absolutely need to
be done by a certain time. However, that’s not what matters most in
life.

Building meaningful, trusting relationships with other people is more
important to me, as is being healthy and, simply, having fun.

### More on Deadlines

Does anyone still use [Gantt Charts](http://www.gantt.com/) in software
development projects? Probably.

Stress is commonly caused by unrealistic expectations. Anyone who has
worked in software development for long knows how unpredictable an
activity it is. So, what better way to subject developers to stress than
set deadlines?

Personally, I find it much healthier to remind myself of one of my
favourite Douglas Adams quotes:

> I love deadlines. I like the whooshing sound they make as they fly by.

But appreciating the *whooshing* is something I need to work at.

### Anxiety and Euphoria

Last year, in a post about [happiness and
programming](/blog/archives/2013-06-18-on-happiness-and-programming), I
alluded to something the Australian cartoonist Michael Leunig said about
creative work:

> Disillusionment precedes creativity.

That’s so true in programming. Anyone who has struggled for hours to try
to solve a programming problem will understand this. Jamie Forrest’s
expression of this aspect of the life of a software developer certainly
struck a chord with others!

[![](https://keithpitty.com/rails/active_storage/blobs/proxy/eyJfcmFpbHMiOnsibWVzc2FnZSI6IkJBaHBNUT09IiwiZXhwIjpudWxsLCJwdXIiOiJibG9iX2lkIn19--16e55f6b86542f042b0b365fc2797e697b68d116/coding-oscillation.jpg)](https://twitter.com/jamieforrest/status/334279984321544192)

## Hope for a Better Balance

I guess the aim of this post has been to point out a few aspects of
software development that I see as stress-related and consequently
relevant to mental health. Undoubtedly I have just scratched the
surface.

Whilst some of these factors are unavoidable, I am certain that others
can be better managed and that, at the very least, better awareness of
the risks inherent in software development can help produce better
mental health outcomes.

As an example, let me cite the otherwise excellent book, [*The Healthy
Programmer*](https://pragprog.com/book/jkthp/the-healthy-programmer).
Whilst this book focusses on exercise, posture, diet, caring for your
eyes and many other important aspects of health as a programmer, any
mention of mental health is conspicuously absent.

Thankfully, willingness to be open about mental health issues has come a
long way since 1978. However, it is my belief that we still have a long
way to go, especially in the IT industry.

## Postscript

Some of Rob’s fellow cyclists from Blake eLearning are using the
upcoming [Spring Cycle](http://bicyclensw.org.au/product/sc-city-adult/)
to raise money for [Suicide Prevention
Australia](http://suicidepreventionaust.org/). Please feel free to
[donate](https://springcycle2014.everydayhero.com/au/ride-for-rob).

[![](https://keithpitty.com/rails/active_storage/blobs/proxy/eyJfcmFpbHMiOnsibWVzc2FnZSI6IkJBaHBNdz09IiwiZXhwIjpudWxsLCJwdXIiOiJibG9iX2lkIn19--e315040591411d40f11a94e4699318182cb233c0/ride-for-rob.jpg)](https://springcycle2014.everydayhero.com/au/ride-for-rob)

**Disclaimer:** This article is based on my own life as a software
developer who has experienced mental illness. Whilst I do hold a
Bachelor of Science, I have no qualifications in psychology or medicine.
