---
layout: post
title: Reflecting on RubyConf AU 2019
date: 2019-02-20
permalink: /blog/archives/2019-02-20-reflecting-on-rubyconf-au-2019
---

## Surprise!

On 12th November last year I received an email via PaperCall with the
following words which grabbed my attention:

> Congratulations Keith Pitty! :tada:

> We are really excited to let you know that your talk, “What were they
> thinking?”, has been selected for RubyConf AU 2019.

> Can you please confirm that you will be able to bring yourself and
> your talk by visiting the link below?

I immediately felt a mixture of excitement and panic. Having submitted a
proposal at the last minute I was now faced with the prospect of
converting my abstract into a 20 minute talk that did it justice and
provided value to the audience.

I accepted the challenge and earlier this month [presented at RubyConf
AU](https://rubyconf.org.au/2019/schedule#friday) in Melbourne!

## My Talk

The genesis of my talk was many years of thinking about experiences I
have had with codebases. Legacy code that hasn’t [been
loved](https://keithpitty.com/blog/archives/2015-02-06-loving-legacy-code)
can result in painful experiences for future developers, frustration for
users not to mention expensive consequences for owners.

So that’s the background. You can [watch the
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KiGbAbjYAjI&index=13&t=0s&list=PL9_jjLrTYxc3dTbvb8fIuzDFGTCaEdO3a)
and [see the
slides](https://speakerdeck.com/keithpitty/what-were-they-thinking) for
yourself. To give you a bit more of an idea of the content, I’ll give a
quick overview below.

![](https://keithpitty.com/rails/active_storage/blobs/proxy/eyJfcmFpbHMiOnsibWVzc2FnZSI6IkJBaHBRdz09IiwiZXhwIjpudWxsLCJwdXIiOiJibG9iX2lkIn19--255e6a5b6c3b91245ec8b700dd58e9bdefd9d15c/rubyconf-au-2019-kp.jpg)

*Thanks to John Carney for this photo of me presenting.*

### Disciplined Development

Software is liable to decay over time unless it is nurtured. Such
nurturing should include such things as refactoring to improve internal
design, which implies automated testing, sufficient up-front design to
increase the likelihood of a successful outcome, healthy peer review, a
well documented git history and load testing.

All of this requires discipline. Sometimes it also requires negotiation
with stakeholders.

### Planned Maintenance

An aspect that can involve both discipline and negotiation with
stakeholders is planning and carrying out maintenance such as installing
security patches and keeping software on which your applications depend
up to date.

Whilst attention to the detail of planned maintenance is something that
many developers can do well, negotiating with business owners to give it
sufficient priority is a different challenge altogether.

### Philosophy

Before delving into the challenges to communicate better, I touched on a
couple of more philosophical topics which I considered relevant to the
topic. Firstly I referred to what is sometimes described as “continuous
flow”. I then suggested that it was time to reflect on how a mature
consideration of the Agile approach could better serve us.

### Persuasion

In my experience it can be difficult to persuade some business owners of
the vital importance of the sort of activities that are essential to
keep legacy codebase in a healthy state so that it survives in a form
that enables it to support evolving needs.

The challenge to practice becoming more persuasive comprised a large
part of the second half of my talk.

## Feedback

Once I had given my talk I was delighted at the positive feedback I
received in person, whether it was from other
[speakers](https://rubyconf.org.au/2019/speakers), former colleagues or
new Ruby acquaintances. By the way, there were many inspiring talks at
the conference so if you weren’t there I encourage you to
[watch](https://rubyconf.org.au/2019/schedule#thursday)
[them](https://rubyconf.org.au/2019/schedule#friday).

When I looked at Twitter I was humbled to see lovely feedback such as
the following from Mel.

![](https://keithpitty.com/rails/active_storage/blobs/proxy/eyJfcmFpbHMiOnsibWVzc2FnZSI6IkJBaHBSQT09IiwiZXhwIjpudWxsLCJwdXIiOiJibG9iX2lkIn19--a6fb11a43a5dbc2b7e250607a39312531cbbc5f4/rubyconf-au-2019-humourous.jpg)

I’m keen to hear further reactions, especially from those who weren’t
able to be in Melbourne for the conference. We were so lucky that [the
organisers](https://twitter.com/CaitlinPB/status/1093422786196889600)
engaged [Next Day Video](http://t.co/zibfPzbNyS) who in fact made the
videos of the talks available on the *same* day!

So, if you’d like to get in touch and give me your take on my talk,
please feel free to do so either via this site or
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/keithpitty).

## Thanks

Finally, a big thank you to all who made my experience at RubyConf AU
2019 so rewarding: those who selected the talk, my family for listening
to me practice, the organisers, the lovely MCs, the audience and
especially those who were kind and thoughtful enough to discuss my talk
with me afterwards.
