---
layout: post
title: Reflecting on My Retrospectives Journey
date: 2021-08-10
permalink: /blog/archives/2021-08-10-reflecting-on-my-retrospectives-journey
---

## The Initial Inspiration

It must be getting on to a decade ago now.

[![](/assets/images/agile-retrospectives-book.jpg)](https://pragprog.com/titles/dlret/agile-retrospectives/)

I had been freelancing, doing Ruby on Rails development for Blake
eLearning for a few years. The size of the team had grown significantly
since I started contributing.

Thinking further back, I had been a keen practitioner of all things
Agile since 2001. My colleagues and I at an Enterprise Java consultancy
had been early practitioners of eXtreme Programming. We were keen to
learn more about the meeting of minds that led to the [Agile
Manifesto](https://agilemanifesto.org/).

So, it was in about 2013 when I started reading [*Agile
Retrospectives*](https://pragprog.com/titles/dlret/agile-retrospectives/)
by Esther Derby and Diana Larsen that I suggested to the Blake Tech
Lead, [Martin Stannard](https://www.linkedin.com/in/martinstannard/),
that retrospectives would be beneficial to the team.

## My Journey

### Using Trello

At some point we had adopted [Trello](https://trello.com) as our tool of
choice for tracking our work. So, when we began holding retrospectives,
it seemed natural to use Trello to capture the discussion points for
each retro. After all, Trello is an adaptable tool, and it enables
remote participation.

Regardless of the tool, my recollection is that adopting the practice of
holding regular retros significantly helped our teamwork at Blake. We
may not have been as sophisticated as Esther or Diana. Nevertheless, the
simple opportunity for the team to gather and reflect on our recent
work, and for each member to have their say, was powerful.

### A lo-fi approach

In mid 2015 I moved on to work at The Conversation. I spent the first
week on site, in Melbourne. At the end of that week, as was the usual
practice on a Friday, the team held a retrospective.

It was definitely lo-fi. The tools to support the discussion were a
whiteboard and coloured markers. The board was divided into quadrants to
guide the team’s focus on what had gone well, what hadn’t gone so well,
what questions had arisen and what actions should be taken. At the end
of the retro a mobile phone was used to take a photo of the board. That
photo was then emailed to the team. It was a practice that had so far
stood the test of time.

At this point I should emphasise that I had joined the team as it’s
first remote member. So, at the end of the next week when I was back in
my home office, an obvious challenge surfaced. I had no visibility of
the retro board until after the retro had concluded! As the weeks went
by I suggested that we consider using Trello. However, there was
resistance, probably because the simplicity of the quadrants on the
board had worked so well for the team for so long.

### RemoteRetro is born

Months went by. In February of 2016 the team was at the Gold Coast in
Queensland for the fourth edition of RubyConf AU. One of my colleagues,
[Mark Cipolla](https://www.markcipolla.com/), had been thinking about my
inability to participate in the retros as fully as the rest of the team.

Thankfully for me, this thought led to action! During those few days on
the Gold Coast, Mark started developing a web application that mimicked
the team’s retro white board. Sure, in it’s initial form the tool was
somewhat rough around the edges. But it solved my problem!

[![](/assets/images/remoteretro.jpg)](https://remoteretro.io/)

From then on, using [RemoteRetro](https://remoteretro.io/), everyone in
our team was able to add items to the retro board via a web browser.
Mark quickly added a feature to allow voting so that the team could give
more focus to discussing the issues that most people cared about.

For some time [RemoteRetro](https://remoteretro.io/) was just used by
the development team within The Conversation.

Meanwhile, Mark kindly invited me to join him as a co-founder of this
side-project. We worked on it at a Rails Camp in the Gold Coast
hinterland, ironing out some bugs and gave a demo of
[RemoteRetro](https://remoteretro.io/) on the last night. I guess that
was one way other development teams came to learn about the potential to
use [RemoteRetro](https://remoteretro.io/) in their team retros.

At another Rails Camp in late 2017, we added some polish to
[RemoteRetro](https://remoteretro.io/) so that users could actually sign
in and, for example, see boards for previous retros from within the
tool. This was a significant weekend that saw us take the product
towards a level where it may justify paying customers.

### A demand to pay for RemoteRetro

![](/assets/images/feedback-from-myles.jpg)

As you can see from the tweet above, by March 2018 we were getting some
encouraging feedback from other users of what was still a free product.

![](/assets/images/demand-from-myles.jpg)

Not only that, Myles quite rightly pointed out that users should have
the opportunity to pay for RemoteRetro!

So, Mark and I set about enabling others to pay for using what for a
couple of years had been a free product.

### Subscriptions launched

As has been the case for most of RemoteRetro’s history, Mark did the
bulk of the work on the codebase to pave the way for subscriptions to be
introduced. However, I do recall that during a trip to Melbourne to
watch a couple of games of footy and catch up with friends and family, I
spent a few hours with Mark that culminated in us launching a version of
[RemoteRetro](https://remoteretro.io/) that allowed users to subscribe.

Yes, after a period of more than two years during which the tool had
been free to use, we had enabled Myles and others to “throw us some
dollars” in exchange for using [RemoteRetro](https://remoteretro.io/)!

Happily for us, despite it having a small user base,
[RemoteRetro](https://remoteretro.io/) is now used by teams all over the
globe.

We are aware that there is scope for improving the product. However, we
also continue to guard against the tool becoming unnecessarily complex
as a result of feature bloat. Having said that, if you’ve given
[RemoteRetro](https://remoteretro.io/) a try and have some suggestions
about how it would better serve your team,
[feedback](mailto:support@remoteretro.io) is always welcome.

### More experience with retros

In 2018 I introduced retrospectives to the development team at
Birdsnest. Looking back on that time, I must admit that there were times
when I struggled to maintain my composure, sometimes during a
retrospective. I am grateful to a colleague for reminding me of the
*Prime Directive*. Originally emphasised by Norm Kerth, it states:

> “Regardless of what we discover, we understand and truly believe that
> everyone did the best job they could, given what they knew at the
> time, their skills and abilities, the resources available, and the
> situation at hand.”

Reflecting on this fundamental perspective can be humbling.

Later, after I had moved on to Clover in mid-2019, our teams benefited
from using different formats of retrospectives. By this time
[RemoteRetro](https://remoteretro.io/) had been adapted to support
alternatives such as Start/Stop/Continue and Mad/Sad/Glad, as well as
the ability to create custom formats.

### Why I love retrospectives

From very early years in my life I’ve enjoyed teamwork. I guess it stems
originally from the experiences I had playing team sports. As the years
went by I accumulated other types of teamwork, at school, university and
in the workplace.

A core facet of teamwork is ensuring that every member of the team feels
empowered to have their say.

That’s why I love retrospectives. As the saying goes, a team is greater
than the sum of its parts. Retrospectives are a powerful tool for
drawing upon the thoughts and feelings of all members of a team in a
constructive way.

### Learning from the masters

Unsurprisingly, I still feel that I have much to learn about
retrospectives.

[![](/assets/images/retrospective-antipatterns.jpg)](https://www.informit.com/store/retrospectives-antipatterns-9780136823360)

Several years ago, at a YOW! conference, I recall hearing [Aino Vonge
Corry](https://www.linkedin.com/in/ainovongecorry/) speak passionately
about retrospectives. She has accumulated much experience in
facilitating them, to the extent that she has published a [comprehensive
book of retrospective
antipatterns](https://www.informit.com/store/retrospectives-antipatterns-9780136823360).
I’m still digesting them but based on what I have read so far, I
thoroughly recommend adding Aino’s book to the one by Esther and Diana
that originally inspired me.

### Looking ahead

If you’ve read this far, you may have developed the impression that this
post is a thinly-masked plug for [RemoteRetro](https://remoteretro.io/).
I guess that’s partly true.

But only partly.

As I discovered last year when [facilitating a discussion about remote
retrospectives](https://keithpitty.com/blog/archives/2020-10-21-succeeding-with-remote-retrospectives),
there’s a range of tools that teams are using whilst conducting
retrospectives online, now that the pandemic has resulted in team
members working from home.

With an eye to the future, I’m fortunate to be looking forward to
participating in retros on a regular basis, and learning more about how
to make the most of them.
