---
layout: post
title: On Vulnerability and Trust
date: 2022-07-30
permalink: /blog/archives/2022-07-30-on-vulnerability-and-trust
---

![](/assets/images/matt-heaton-EyTOnL4ST9k-unsplash.jpg)

Photo by
<a href="https://unsplash.com/@mattisrad?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText">Matt
Heaton</a> on
<a href="https://unsplash.com/collections/517900/vulnerability?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText">Unsplash</a>

## Background

The concept of trust has been occupying my thoughts a lot lately.

Why?

It relates to the fundamental changes that Envato has been
[undergoing](https://www.smartcompany.com.au/technology/envato-redundancy-business-restructuring/)
since the end of May. There has been [no hiding the
fact](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/hichameassi_its-been-a-tough-week-at-envato-envato-activity-6938362280489213952-cYzQ/)
that, especially during the first week that followed the announcement,
working life was tough.

Two months on, to various degrees, we are all adapting to change.

The outcome of such change can be challenging to people. Indeed, as I
reflect on the last couple of months, I recall that, a couple of days
after the news, I tweeted about how I was coping:

![](/assets/images/emotions-so-many-tweet.png)

The upheaval that change can bring often poses challenges to levels of
trust within an organisation. This shouldn’t be surprising.

## Collaboration, trust, and time

Why do I sense a keen focus on trust during this settling period
following significant organisational change?

In answer to that, let me refer to the ideas encompassed by the [Heart
of Agile](https://heartofagile.com/), proposed by Alistair Cockburn in
2016. Alistair was one of the creators of the [Agile
Manifesto](https://agilemanifesto.org/) in 2001. Following years of
Alistair’s consulting, he came to the realisation that an Agile approach
boiled down to four imperatives: Collaboration, Delivery, Reflection,
and Improvement. Each of these could be expanded. In particular,
collaboration depends up on trust.

To me, in the context of an organisation reforming following significant
change, the need for trust to enable collaboration, is key. After all,
if any organisation is to deliver value, it is likely that collaboration
will be necessary. Without trust, collaboration is likely to be
inhibited.

[![](/assets/images/heart-of-agile.png)](https://heartofagile.com/)

So, trust enables collaboration. And, my observation, not just in this
current example, is that a significant change to an organisation
disrupts existing trusting relationships. Again, this shouldn’t be
surprising. When existing teams are disrupted, carefully curated
internal support structures and relationships are jeopardised.

When I was pondering this very important concept of trust, I was
reminded of something I learned last year:

![](/assets/images/trust-consistency-time-tweet.png)

If we accept this premise, we need to accept the logical consequence of
significant change to an organisation. It will take time for new,
trusting relationships to form. Not only that, it will take time for
collaborators to build recognition of the requisite consistency that
leads to trust.

Yes, time. How long? Well, time will tell.

Maybe I had an inkling about this when, on the weekend following the
announcement, I tweeted:

![](/assets/images/patience-kindness-tweet.png)

## Vulnerability

So, I’ve emphasised my keen focus on trust in the context of these
recent changes. How does vulnerability relate to trust?

Recently, I recalled a book by Daniel Coyle, called [*The Culture
Code*](https://danielcoyle.com/the-culture-code/), which I was sure had
delved into this subject.

[![](/assets/images/culture-code.jpg)](https://danielcoyle.com/the-culture-code/)

I was not disappointed.

The part in the book that I settled on was chapter 8, *The Vulnerability
Loop*. Its contents are fascinating. The author refers to the research
of Dr. Jeff Polzer, a professor of organisational behavior at Harvard,
“who has spent a large chunk of his career examining how small,
seemingly insignificant social exchanges can create cascade effects in
groups.”

The key finding is that if a signal of vulnerability expressed by one
person is detected by another, the receiver is likely to respond by
signalling their own vulnerability. Then, if the first person detects
this vulnerability signal, “a norm is established; closeness and trust
increase.”

So, mutual expression of vulnerability, and an acknowledgement of each
other’s vulnerability leads to an increase in trust. Now I’m imagining
the potential for these trust-enhancing interactions to take place
across an entire organisation of several hundred people. In theory, this
could be very powerful.

In practice, it obviously depends upon the willingness of many
individuals to lean into their vulnerability within new teams, and
across teams within an entire organisation, in the knowledge that each
team is in the process of forming.

This is where leadership comes into play. As one of the leaders within
Envato, albeit several levels removed from the executive, I have a role
to play.

## Rebuilding trust

As one of the leaders within the company, I know that I have a certain
reach. I have most impact within my immediate team, and department.
There are people in other teams with whom I interact. I realise that I
have many potential interactions, yet a natural limit to the impact I
can expect to have. Nevertheless, I have potential to have an impact. I
have a role to play in rebuilding trust.

One of the ways in which I can contribute to rebuilding trust is to
express my vulnerability within as many social exchanges as possible.
The degree to which these will lead to an increase in trust through
mutual vulnerability is likely to vary. Hopefully, in some cases, not
only will this occur, but my counterpart will subconsciously realise the
positive effect of expressing vulnerability.

## My focus on vulnerability

Now comes the crunch. How do I lean into this idea of expressing
vulnerability? After all, there is a natural human tendency to want to
do the reverse, is there not?

Will my ego take a beating if I deliberately, repeatedly, express
vulnerability? Wouldn’t I prefer to have it boosted by more positive
recognition?

I think there is some counter-intuitive thinking and feeling at play
here. It is likely to take some practice over a period of time in order
to get feedback that expressing vulnerability is contributing to greater
trust.

We shall see. Based on the evidence of Dr. Polzer, I think it’s worth a
shot.
